proof), the Implicit Function Theorem, etc. The main new topic for you will be differential forms. They are presented not as mysterious “multi-indexed expressions,” but rather as things that assign numbers to smooth domains. A 1-form assigns to a smooth curve a number, a 2-form assigns to a surface a number, a 3-form assigns to a solid a number, and so on. Orientation (clockwise, counterclockwise, etc.) is important and lets you see why cowlicks are inevitable – the Hairy Ball Theorem. The culmination of the differential forms business is Stokes’ Formula, which unifies what you know about div, grad, and curl. It also leads to a short and simple proof of the Brouwer Fixed Point Theorem – a fact usually considered too advanced for undergraduates.

Chapter 6 is about Lebesgue measure and integration. It is not about measure theory in the abstract, but rather about measure theory in the plane, where you can see it. Surely I am not the first person to have rediscovered J.C. Burkill’s approach to the Lebesgue integral, but I hope you will come to value it as much as I do. After you understand a few nontrivial things about area in the plane, you are naturally led to define the integral as the area under the curve – the elementary picture you saw in high school calculus. Then the basic theorems of Lebesgue integration simply fall out from the picture. Included in the chapter is the subject of density points – points at which a set “clumps together.” I consider density points central to Lebesgue measure theory.

At the end of each chapter are a great many exercises. Intentionally, there is no solution manual. You should expect to be confused and frustrated when you first try to solve the harder problems. Frustration is a good thing. It will strengthen you and it is the natural mental state of most mathematicians most of the time. Join the club! When you do solve a hard problem yourself or with a group of your friends, you will treasure it far more than something you pick up off the web. For encouragement, read Sam Young’s story at http://legacyrlmoore.org/reference/young.html.

I have adopted Moe Hirsch’s star system for the exercises. One star is hard, two stars is very hard, and a three-star exercise is a question to which I do not know the answer. Likewise, starred sections are more challenging.