where $\mathfrak{e}(x, y) \to 0$ as $(x, y) \to (0, 0)$. Since $gx \to 0$ as $x \to 0$, the error factor $\mathfrak{e}(x, gx)$ does tend to 0 as $x \to 0$, the remainder is sublinear with respect to $x$, and $g$ is differentiable at 0 with $(Dg)_0 = -B^{-1}A$.

All facts proved at the origin hold equally at points $(x, y)$ on the zero locus near the origin. For the origin is nothing special. Thus, $g$ is differentiable at $x$ and $(Dg)_x = -B_x^{-1} \circ A_x$ where

$$A_x = \frac{\partial f(x, gx)}{\partial x} \quad B_x = \frac{\partial f(x, gx)}{\partial y}.$$

Since $gx$ is continuous (being differentiable) and $f$ is $C^1$, $A_x$ and $B_x$ are continuous functions of $x$. According to Cramer’s Rule for finding the inverse of a matrix, the entries of $B_x^{-1}$ are explicit, algebraic functions of the entries of $B_x$, and therefore they depend continuously on $x$. Therefore $g$ is $C^1$.

To complete the proof that $g$ is $C^r$ we apply induction. For $2 \leq r < \infty$, assume the theorem is true for $r - 1$. When $f$ is $C^r$ this implies that $g$ is $C^{r-1}$. Because they are composites of $C^{r-1}$ functions, $A_x$ and $B_x$ are $C^{r-1}$. Because the entries of $B_x^{-1}$ depend algebraically on the entries of $B_x$, $B_x^{-1}$ is also $C^{r-1}$. Therefore $(Dg)_x$ is $C^{r-1}$ and $g$ is $C^r$. If $f$ is $C^\infty$, we have just shown that $g$ is $C^r$ for all finite $r$ and thus $g$ is $C^\infty$.

Exercises 35 and 36 discuss the properties of matrix inversion avoiding Cramer’s Rule and finite dimensionality.

Next we are going to deduce the Inverse Function Theorem from the Implicit Function Theorem. A fair question is: Since they turn out to be equivalent theorems, why not do it the other way around? Well, in my own experience the Implicit Function Theorem is more basic and flexible. I have at times needed forms of the Implicit Function Theorem with weaker differentiability hypotheses respecting $x$ than $y$ and they do not follow from the Inverse Function Theorem. For example, if we merely assume that $B = \partial f(x_0, y_0)/\partial y$ is invertible, that $\partial f(x, y)/\partial x$ is a continuous function of $(x, y)$, and that $f$ is continuous (or Lipschitz) then the local implicit function of $f$ is continuous (or Lipschitz). It is not necessary to assume that $f$ is of class $C^1$.

Just as a homeomorphism is a continuous bijection whose inverse is continuous, so a $C^r$ diffeomorphism is a $C^r$ bijection whose inverse is $C^r$, $1 \leq r \leq \infty$. The inverse being $C^r$ is not automatic. The example to remember is $f(x) = x^3$. It is a $C^\infty$ bijection $\mathbb{R} \to \mathbb{R}$ and is a homeomorphism but not a diffeomorphism because its inverse fails to be differentiable at the origin. Since differentiability implies continuity, every diffeomorphism is a homeomorphism.