Truth

When is a mathematical statement accepted as true? Generally, mathematicians would answer “Only when it has a proof inside a familiar mathematical framework.” A picture may be vital in getting you to believe a statement. An analogy with something you know to be true may help you understand it. An authoritative teacher may force you to parrot it. A formal proof, however, is the ultimate and only reason to accept a mathematical statement as true. A recent debate in Berkeley focused the issue for me. According to a math teacher from one of our local private high schools, his students found proofs in mathematics were of little value, especially compared to “convincing arguments.” Besides, the mathematical statements were often seen as obviously true and in no need of formal proof anyway. I offer you a paraphrase of Bob Osserman’s response.

But a convincing argument is not a proof. A mathematician generally wants both, and certainly would be less likely to accept a convincing argument by itself than a formal proof by itself. Least of all would a mathematician accept the proposal that we should generally replace proofs with convincing arguments.

There has been a tendency in recent years to take the notion of proof down from its pedestal. Critics point out that standards of rigor change from century to century. New gray areas appear all the time. Is a proof by computer an acceptable proof? Is a proof that is spread over many journals and thousands of pages, that is too long for any one person to master, a proof? And of course, venerable Euclid is full of flaws, some filled in by Hilbert, others possibly still lurking.