every sequence that converges in $M$. Thus, $\emptyset$ and $M$ are closed subsets of $M$. Their complements, $M$ and $\emptyset$, are therefore open: $\emptyset$ and $M$ are both closed and open.

Subsets of $M$ that are both closed and open are **clopen**. See also Exercise 125. It turns out that in $\mathbb{R}$ the only clopen sets are $\emptyset$ and $\mathbb{R}$. In $\mathbb{Q}$, however, things are quite different, sets such as $\{r \in \mathbb{Q} : -\sqrt{2} < r < \sqrt{2}\}$ being clopen in $\mathbb{Q}$. To summarize,

*A subset of a metric space can be closed, open, both, or neither.*

You should expect the “typical” subset of a metric space to be neither closed nor open.

The **topology** of $M$ is the collection $\mathcal{T}$ of all open subsets of $M$.

**6 Theorem** $\mathcal{T}$ has three properties:† as a system it is closed under union, finite intersection, and it contains $\emptyset$, $M$. That is,

(a) Every union of open sets is an open set.
(b) The intersection of finitely many open sets is an open set.
(c) $\emptyset$ and $M$ are open sets.

**Proof** (a) If $\{U_\alpha\}$ is any collection‡ of open subsets of $M$ and $V = \bigcup U_\alpha$ then $V$ is open. For if $p \in V$ then $p$ belongs to at least one $U_\alpha$ and there is an $r > 0$ such that

$$d(p, q) < r \implies q \in U_\alpha.$$

Since $U_\alpha \subset V$, this implies that all such $q$ lie in $V$, proving that $V$ is open.

(b) If $U_1, \ldots, U_n$ are open sets and $W = \bigcap U_k$ then $W$ is open. For if $p \in W$ then for each $k$, $1 \leq k \leq n$, then there is an $r_k > 0$ such that

$$d(p, q) < r_k \implies q \in U_k.$$

Take $r = \min\{r_1, \ldots, r_n\}$. Then $r > 0$ and

$$d(p, q) < r \implies q \in U_k,$$

†Any collection $\mathcal{T}$ of subsets of a set $X$ that satisfies these three properties is called a topology on $X$, and $X$ is called a **topological space**. Topological spaces are more general than metric spaces: There exist topologies that do not arise from a metric. Think of them as pathological. The question of which topologies can be generated by a metric and which cannot is discussed in *Topology* by Munkres. See also Exercise 30.

‡The $\alpha$ in the notation $U_\alpha$ “indexes” the sets. If $\alpha = 1, 2, \ldots$ then the collection is countable, but we are just as happy to let $\alpha$ range through uncountable index sets.