where the $K_j$’s are $n$ first integrals in involution (check this). The corresponding action-angle variables are given by (Problem 8.17)

$$I_j = \frac{1}{2} \left( \frac{P_j^2}{\omega_j} + \omega_j Q_j^2 \right), \quad \theta_j = \arccot \frac{P_j}{\omega_j Q_j}. \tag{8.80}$$

For example, consider the following Hamiltonian

$$H(p, q) = \sum_{j=1}^{n} \frac{p_j}{2m} + U_0 (q_{j+1} - q_j), \quad q_0 = q_{n+1} = 0 \tag{8.81}$$

which describes a lattice of $n$ equal particles (with mass $m$) with nearest neighbor interaction described by the potential $U_0(x)$. The zeroth and $n$’th particle are considered fixed and $q_j$ is the displacement of the $j$’th particle from its equilibrium position. If we assume that the particles are coupled by springs, the potential would be $U_0(x) = \frac{k}{2} x^2$, where $k > 0$ is the so-called spring constant, and we have a harmonic oscillator. The motion is decomposed into $n$ modes corresponding to the eigenvectors of the Jacobian matrix of the potential. Physicists believed for a long time that a nonlinear perturbation of the force will lead to thermalization. That is, if the system starts in a certain mode of the linearized system, the energy will eventually be distributed equally over all modes. However, Fermi, Pasta, and Ulam showed with computer experiments that this is not true (Problem 8.18). This is related to the existence of solitons, see for example [30].

**Problem 8.14** (Symplectic group). Show that $\text{Sp}(2n)$ is indeed a group. Suppose $M \in \text{Sp}(2n)$, show that $\det(M)^2 = 1$ and $\chi_M(z) = z^{2n} \chi_M(z^{-1})$.

**Problem 8.15.** Show that the linear transformation $(P, Q) = (Up, (U^{-1})^T q)$, where $U$ is an arbitrary matrix, is canonical.

**Problem 8.16.** Show that the transformation generated by a function $S$ is canonical by directly proving that $d\varphi$ is symplectic. (Hint: Prove $-Jd\varphi = Jd\psi^T$ using

$$\frac{\partial p}{\partial Q} = \frac{\partial^2 S_1}{\partial Q \partial q} = -\left( \frac{\partial P}{\partial q} \right)^T$$

and similar for the others.)

**Problem 8.17.** Consider the harmonic oscillator in one dimension

$$H(p, q) = \frac{1}{2} p^2 + \frac{\omega^2}{2} q^2$$

and show that $S_1(q, \theta) = \frac{\omega}{2} q^2 \cot(\theta)$ generates a canonical transformation to action-angle variables.