Preface

About

When you publish a textbook on such a classical subject the first question you will be faced with is: Why the heck another book? Well, everything started when I was supposed to give the basic course on Ordinary Differential Equations in Summer 2000 (which at that time met 5 hours per week). While there were many good books on the subject available, none of them quite fitted my needs. I wanted a concise but rigorous introduction with full proofs also covering classical topics such as Sturm–Liouville boundary value problems, differential equations in the complex domain as well as modern aspects of the qualitative theory of differential equations. The course was continued with a second part on Dynamical Systems and Chaos in Winter 2000/01 and the notes were extended accordingly. Since then the manuscript has been rewritten and improved several times according to the feedback I got from students over the years when I redid the course. Moreover, since I had the notes on my homepage from the very beginning, this triggered a significant amount of feedback as well. Beginning from students who reported typos, incorrectly phrased exercises, etc. over colleagues who reported errors in proofs and made suggestions for improvements, to editors who approached me about publishing the notes. Last but not least, this also resulted in a chinese translation. Moreover, if you google for the manuscript, you can see that it is used at several places worldwide, linked as a reference at various sites including Wikipedia. Finally, Google Scholar will tell you that it is even cited in several publications. Hence I decided that it is time to turn it into a real book.