7.3. The Poincaré–Bendixson theorem

$$\dot{s} \neq 0.$$ Using this map the points of $\Sigma$ can be ordered. Moreover, for each regular $x \in M$ (i.e., $f(x) \neq 0$), we can find an arc $\Sigma$ containing $x$ which is transversal to $f$ (i.e., $\dot{s}_1(t)f_2(s(t)) - \dot{s}_2(t)f_1(s(t)) \neq 0$).

Given a regular point $x_0 \in \Sigma$ we can define the points of subsequent intersections of $\gamma_\sigma(x_0)$ with $\Sigma$ by $x_n = \Phi(t_n, x_0)$. Of course this set may be finite or even empty in general. However, if it is infinite we must have $t_n \rightarrow T_\sigma(x_0)$. In fact, if $t_n \rightarrow T \neq T_\sigma(x_0)$ then the limit $y = \lim_{t \rightarrow T} \Phi(t, x_0) \in M$ exists and must be a regular point. Hence we can straighten out the flow near $y$, which shows that the difference between two consecutive intersection times cannot converge to 0 and hence contradicts our assumption.

**Lemma 7.9.** Let $x_0 \in M$ be a regular point and $\Sigma$ a transversal arc containing $x_0$. Denote by $x_n = \Phi(t_n, x_0)$, $n \geq 1$, the (maybe finite) ordered (according to $t_n$) sequence of intersections of $\gamma_\sigma(x_0)$ with $\Sigma$. Then $x_n$ is monotone (with respect to the order of $\Sigma$).

**Proof.** We only consider the $\sigma = +$ case. If $x_0 = x_1$ we are done. Otherwise consider the curve $J$ from $x_0$ to $x_1$ along $\gamma_+(x_0)$ and back from $x_1$ to $x_0$ along $\Sigma$. This curve $J$ is the image of a continuous bijection from $S^1$ to $J$. Since $S^1$ is compact, it is a homeomorphism. Hence $J$ is a Jordan curve and $M \setminus J = M_1 \cup M_2$.

Now let $\tilde{\Sigma} \subset \Sigma$ be the arc from $x_0$ to $x_1$ along $\Sigma$. Then $f$ always points either in the direction of $M_1$ or $M_2$ along $\tilde{\Sigma}$ since it cannot change direction by transversality of $\Sigma$. So $\gamma_+(x_1)$ enters either $M_1$ or $M_2$ and then is trapped since it can neither exit through $\tilde{\Sigma}$ (as the vector field points in the wrong direction) nor cross the orbit from $x_0$ to $x_1$ (compare Figure 7.7). Hence either $\gamma_+(x_1) \subset M_1$ or $\gamma_+(x_1) \subset M_2$. Moreover, if $x_0 < x_1$, then $\gamma_+(x_1)$ must remain in the component containing all points $x \in \Sigma$, $x_1 < x$, and if $x_0 > x_1$, then $\gamma_+(x_1)$ must remain in the component containing all points $x \in \Sigma$, $x_1 > x$. Iterating this procedure proves the claim.