where $x_h(t)$ is an arbitrary solution of the homogeneous equation and $u(t)$ is the solution of the homogeneous equation corresponding to the initial condition $u(0) = \dot{u}(0) = \cdots = u^{(n-2)}(0) = 0$ and $u^{(n-1)}(0) = 1$ (Problem 3.21).

Hence the algorithm for solving a linear $n$’th order equation with constant coefficients is as follows: Start with the homogeneous equation, compute the zeros of the characteristic polynomial and write down the general solution as a linear combination of the fundamental solutions (3.54). Find a particular solution of the inhomogeneous equation and determine the unknown constants of the homogeneous equation from the initial conditions. The particular solution of the inhomogeneous equation can be found by evaluating the integral in (3.57). However, in many situations it is more efficient to make a suitable ansatz for the solution (Problem 3.22):

**Lemma 3.8.** Consider the inhomogeneous equation (3.56) with right-hand side of the form $g(t) = p(t)e^{\beta t}$, where $p(t)$ is a polynomial. Then there is a particular solution of the same form $x_p(t) = q(t)e^{\beta t}$, where $q(t)$ is a polynomial which satisfies $\deg(q) = \deg(p)$ if $\beta \notin \{ \alpha_j \}_{j=1}^m$ is not equal to any of the characteristic eigenvalues and $\deg(q) = \deg(p) + a_j$ if $\beta = \alpha_j$ is equal to one of the characteristic eigenvalues whose algebraic multiplicity is $a_j$.

Note that in the case $\beta = \alpha_j$ you can assume the first $a_j$ coefficients of $q$ to be zero, since they correspond to a homogenous solution. Moreover, if you allow complex values for $\beta = \lambda + i\omega$, this also includes the case where $g(t) = p(t)e^{\lambda t} \cos(\omega t)$ or $g(t) = p(t)e^{\lambda t} \sin(\omega t)$ after taking real and imaginary parts. Finally, the case of linear combinations of such terms comes for free by linearity.

Of special importance is the case of second order, which appears in a vast number of applications. For example when modeling electrical circuits:

**Example.** An electrical circuit consists of elements each of which has two connectors (in and out), where every connector of one element is connected to one or more connectors of the other elements. Mathematically speaking we have a directed graph.

At each time $t$, there will be a certain current $I(t)$ flowing through each element and a certain voltage difference $V(t)$ between its connectors. It is of no importance which connector is called in and which one out. However, the current is counted positively if it flows from in to out and similarly for the voltage differences. The state space of the system is given by the pairs $(I,V)$ of all elements in the circuit. These pairs must satisfy two requirements. By Kirchhoff’s first law, the sum over all currents in a vertex must vanish (conservation of charge) and by Kirchhoff’s second law, the