Proof. By the change of variable formula we have

$$V(t) = \int_{U(t)} dx = \int_{U} \det(d\Phi_t(x)) dx.$$

Since $\Pi_x(t) = d\Phi_t(x)$ satisfies the first variational equation,

$$\dot{\Pi}_x(t) = df(\Phi_t(x))\Pi_x(t),$$

Liouville’s formula (3.91) for linear systems implies

$$\det(d\Phi_t(x)) = \exp \left( \int_0^t \text{div}(f(\Phi_s(x))) ds \right)$$

(recall $\text{tr}(df(x)) = \text{div}(f(x))$). Thus

$$\dot{V}(t) = \int_{U} \text{div}(f(\Phi_t(x))) \det(d\Phi_t(x)) dx$$

and a second application of the change of variable formula finishes the proof.

Applying this lemma to the Lorenz equation we obtain

$$V(t) = V \text{e}^{-(1+\sigma+b)t}$$

(8.29)

since

$$\text{div}(f) = -(1+\sigma+b).$$

(8.30)

In particular, we see that the measure of $\Phi(t, E_1)$ decreases exponentially, and the measure of $\Lambda$ must be zero. Note that this result also implies that none of the three fixed points can be a source.

Our numerical experiments from above show that $\Lambda$ seems to be a quite complicated set. This is why it was called the *strange attractor* of the Lorenz equation.

However, this is clearly no satisfying mathematical definition of a strange attractor. One possibility is to call an attractor strange if the dynamical system generated by the *time-one map*

$$\Phi_1 : \Lambda \rightarrow \Lambda$$

(8.31)

is *chaotic* and if $\Lambda$ is *fractal*. It is still unknown whether the Lorenz attractor is strange in the sense of this definition. See the book by Sparrow [38] for a survey of results.

I will not go into any further details at this point. We will see how these terms are defined in Section 11.3 and Section 11.6, respectively. However, I hope that this example shows that even simple systems in $\mathbb{R}^3$ can exhibit very complicated dynamics. I also hope that you can now better appreciate the Poincaré–Bendixson which excludes such strange behavior in $\mathbb{R}^2$.

Problem 8.4. *Prove Lemma* 8.7.